Add release notes 0.2.0 (#1873)
VirtusLab/scala-cli: website/docs/release_notes.md

# Release notes

## [v0.2.0](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/releases/tag/v0.2.0)

> ### Change ScalaCLI default behavior

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Require the `--power` option for restricted features by default
```

> By default, now ScalaCLI limited some functionalities, that means that some commands or options may stop working. However, restricted features can be accessed by using the `--power` flag. Alternatively, the `power` mode can be turned on globally by running:

Reviewer: ````suggestion
Until now, Scala CLI has been limiting some of its functionalities in its `scala` distribution.
Starting with `v0.2.0`, those limitation will be applied to all distributions, including `scala-cli`.

Restricted features can be accesed by using the `--power` launcher flag. Do note that launcher flags have to be passed **before** the sub-command.
```bash ignore
scala-cli --power package .
```

Alternatively, the `power` mode can be turned on globally by running:
````

```bash ignore
scala-cli config power true 
```

> Please note that this change may affect your existing scripts or workflows that rely on the limited commands from ScalaCLI (such as `package`, `publish`). You can still use this command with enabled `power` mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that this change may affect your existing scripts or workflows that rely on the limited commands from ScalaCLI (such as `package`, `publish`). You can still use those commands with `power` mode enabled.
```

When you try to use a limited command in restricted mode, you will now see a warning message with suggestions on how to enable this command:

```bash ignore
$ scala-cli package Hello.scala
# This command is restricted and requires setting the `--power` option to be used.
# You can pass it explicitly or set it globally by running:
#    scala-cli config power true
$ scala-cli config power true
$ scala-cli package Hello.scala
# Wrote Hello, run it with
#   ./Hello
```

Added by [@lwronski](https://github.com/lwronski) in https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1835 and  https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1849

> ### Allow executable Scala scripts without file suffix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Allow executable Scala scripts without a file extension
```

> With this release, Scala scripts can now be executed without a file suffix `.sc` when using the `shebang` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of this release Scala scripts without the `*.sc` file extension will be supported for execution when using the `shebang` command.
```

```scala title=hello
#!/usr/bin/env -S scala-cli shebang -S 3

println(args.size)
println(args.headOption)
```
```bash
chmod +x hello
./hello Hello World
#2
#Some(Hello)
 ```

> Note that files with no extensions are always run as scripts even though they may contain e.g. valid `.scala` program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that files with no extension are always run as scripts even though they may contain e.g. a valid `.scala` program.
Also, do note that this feature has only been added for `shebang` - the `run` sub-command (which is the default way of running inputs when a sub-command is not specified explicitly) will not support this.
```

Added by [@MaciejG604](https://github.com/MaciejG604) in https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1802

> ###  Breaking changes

Reviewer: technically speaking, the global `--power` is also a breaking change...
```suggestion
###  Other breaking changes
```

#### Remove ammonite imports support

> Based on discussion, support for `$ivy` and `$dep` ammonite imports has been removed. To convert `$ivy` and `$dep` imports into the `using dep` directive, you can use the provided actionable action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The support for `$ivy` and `$dep` ammonite imports has been removed. To easily convert existing 
 `$ivy` and `$dep` imports into the `using dep` directive in your sources, you can use the provided actionable diagnostic.
```

Reviewer: NIT maybe even a gif with the diagnostic could be useful?

Removed by [@MaciejG604](https://github.com/MaciejG604) in https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1787

> #### Drop metabrowse command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Drop the `metabrowse` sub-command
```

With this release, support for Metabrowse has been removed from Scala CLI. This change was made in order to limit the number of features that we need to support, especially since the `Metabrowse` project is no longer being actively worked on.

Remove by [@lwronski](https://github.com/lwronski) in https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1867

#### Rename `using lib` to `using dep`

To be more consistent with dependency command line options `--dep`, the dependency using directive is now passed by `using dep`.

> Please note that we have kept the alias of the old directive (`lib`, `libs`) for backwards compatibility.

Reviewer: We keep the backwards compatibility, so it's not actually a breaking change.

# Release notes

## [v0.2.0](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/releases/tag/v0.2.0)

### Require the `--power` option for restricted features by default

Until now, Scala CLI has been limiting some of its functionalities in its `scala` distribution.

> Starting with `v0.2.0`, those limitation will be applied to all distributions, including `scala-cli`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with `v0.2.0`, those limitation will be applied to all distributions, including `scala-cli`. This was done in order to make the behaviour consistent between the future Scala runner and ScalaCLI.
```
some explanation maybe?

$ scala-cli package Hello.scala
# Wrote Hello, run it with
#   ./Hello
```

Added by [@lwronski](https://github.com/lwronski) in [#1835](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1835) and [#1849](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1849)

### Allow executable Scala scripts without a file extension

As of this release Scala scripts without the `*.sc` file extension will be supported for execution when using the `shebang` command.

```scala title=hello
#!/usr/bin/env -S scala-cli shebang -S 3

println(args.size)
println(args.headOption)
```
```bash
chmod +x hello
./hello Hello World
#2
#Some(Hello)
 ```
Note that files with no extension are always run as scripts even though they may contain e.g. a valid `.scala` program.

Also, do note that this feature has only been added for `shebang` - the `run` sub-command (which is the default way of running inputs when a sub-command is not specified explicitly) will not support this.

Added by [@MaciejG604](https://github.com/MaciejG604) in [#1802](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1802)

### Export information about the project in the json format

```bash ignore
scala-cli --power export --json

> ```

Reviewer 2: Could we should an example output here? OR part of it?

Author: Yeah, so I added basic json output without `Resolvers` field.

# Release notes

## [v0.2.0](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/releases/tag/v0.2.0)

### Require the `--power` option for restricted features by default

Until now, Scala CLI has been limiting some of its functionalities in its `scala` distribution.

> Starting with `v0.2.0`, those limitation will be applied to all distributions, including `scala-cli`. This was done in order to make the behaviour consistent between the future Scala runner and ScalaCLI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with `v0.2.0`, those limitation will be applied to all distributions, including `scala-cli`. 

This was done in order to make the behaviour consistent with Scala CLI acting as the Scala runner.
```
Missed this spot earlier 😅

Added by [@lwronski](https://github.com/lwronski) in [#1835](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1835) and [#1849](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1849)

### Allow executable Scala scripts without a file extension

As of this release Scala scripts without the `*.sc` file extension will be supported for execution when using the `shebang` command.

```scala title=hello
#!/usr/bin/env -S scala-cli shebang -S 3

println(args.size)
println(args.headOption)
```
```bash
chmod +x hello
./hello Hello World
#2
#Some(Hello)
 ```
Note that files with no extension are always run as scripts even though they may contain e.g. a valid `.scala` program.

Also, do note that this feature has only been added for `shebang` - the `run` sub-command (which is the default way of running inputs when a sub-command is not specified explicitly) will not support this.

Added by [@MaciejG604](https://github.com/MaciejG604) in [#1802](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1802)

### Export Project configuration to Json

It is now possible to export configuration from Scala CLI project to Json format with the `export` sub-command.

```bash ignore
scala-cli --power export --json .
```

> It is currently exporting basic information about the project and includes, for example, the following field:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is currently exporting basic information about the project and includes, for example, the following fields:
```

 
- ScalaVersion 
- Platform
- Sources
- Dependencies
- Resolvers

Example of generated Json output:
```json
{
  "scalaVersion": "3.2.2",
  "platform": "JVM",
  "scopes": {
    "main": {
      "sources": [
        "Hello.scala"
      ],
      "dependencies": [
        {
          "groupId": "com.lihaoyi",
          "artifactId": {
            "name": "pprint",
            "fullName": "pprint_3"
          },
          "version": "0.6.6"
        }
      ],
      ...
    }
  }
}
```

Added by [@MaciejG604](https://github.com/MaciejG604) in [#1840](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1840)

### Rename `using lib` to `using dep`

To be more consistent with dependency command line options `--dep`, the dependency using directive is now passed by `using dep`.
Please note that we have kept the alias of the old directive (`lib`, `libs`) for backwards compatibility.

```scala compile
 //> using dep "org.scalameta::munit:0.7.29"
```
Renamed by [@lwronski](https://github.com/lwronski) in [#1827](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/pull/1827)

### Other breaking changes

#### Remove ammonite imports support
The support for `$ivy` and `$dep` ammonite imports has been removed. 

> To easily convert existing `$ivy`   and `$dep` imports into the `using dep` directive in your sources, you can use the provided actionable diagnostic.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To easily convert existing `$ivy` and `$dep` imports into the `using dep` directive in your sources, you can use the provided actionable diagnostic.
```
